---

layout: col-document
tags: OWASP Top Ten Proactive Controls 2024, C7, Implement Digital Identity
document: OWASP Top Ten Proactive Controls 2024
order: 11

---
# C7: Implement Digital Identity

## Description

Digital Identity is a unique representation of an individual, organization (or another subject) as they engage in an online transaction. Authentication is the process of verifying that an individual or entity is who they claim to be.

Session management is the process by which a server maintains the state of the user’s authentication so that the user may continue to use the system without re-authenticating.
Digital identity, authentication, and session management are very complex topics. We're scratching the surface of the topic of Digital Identity here. Ensure that your most capable engineering talent is responsible for maintaining the complexity involved with most Identity solutions.
The [NIST Special Publication 800-63B: Digital Identity Guidelines (Authentication and Lifecycle Management](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html) provide solid guidance on implementing digital identity, authentication, and session management controls. Below are some recommendations for secure implementation to ensure strong digital identity controls are implemented in applications.

### Authentication Assurance Levels

NIST 800-63b describes three levels of authentication assurance called Authentication Assurance Level (AAL). The first level, AAL level 1 is reserved for lower-risk applications that do not contain PII or other private data. At AAL level 1 only single-factor authentication is required, typically through the use of a password (something you know):
- **Level 1 : Passwords**: Passwords are really, really important. We need to store them securely, and we need to sometimes allow users to reset them.
- **Level 2 : Multi-Factor Authentication**: NIST 800-63b AAL level 2 is reserved for higher-risk applications that contain "self-asserted PII or other personal information made available online." At AAL level 2 multi-factor authentication is required including OTP or other forms of multi-factor implementation.
- **Level 3 : Cryptographic Based Authentication**: NIST 800-63b Authentication Assurance Level 3 (AAL3) is required when the impact of compromised systems could lead to personal harm, significant financial loss, harm the public interest or involve civil or criminal violations. AAL3 requires authentication that is "based on proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol." This type of authentication is used to achieve the strongest level of authentication assurance. This is typically done through hardware cryptographic modules. When developing web applications, this will commonly lead to WebAuthn or PassKeys.

#### Level 2 : Multi-Factor Authentication

NIST 800-63b AAL level 2 is reserved for higher-risk applications that contain "self-asserted PII or other personal information made available online." At AAL level 2 multi-factor authentication is required including OTP or other forms of multi-factor implementation.
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) ensures that users are who they claim to be by requiring them to identify themselves with a combination of:

- Something you know – password or PIN
- Something you own – token or phone, when using a phone please use a standard authenticator application heeding standardized protocols such as FIDO2.
- Something you are – biometrics, such as a fingerprint
Using passwords as a sole factor provides weak security. Multi-factor solutions provide a more robust solution by requiring an attacker to acquire more than one element to authenticate with the service.
It is worth noting that biometrics, when employed as a single factor of authentication, are not considered acceptable secrets for digital authentication. They can be obtained online or by taking a picture of someone with a camera phone (e.g., facial images) with or without their knowledge, lifted from objects someone touches (e.g., latent fingerprints), or captured with high-resolution images (e.g., iris patterns). Biometrics must be used only as part of multi-factor authentication with a physical authenticator (something you own). For example, accessing a multi-factor one-time password (OTP) device will generate a one-time password that the user manually enters for the verifier.

#### Level 3 : Cryptographic Based Authentication

NIST 800-63b Authentication Assurance Level 3 (AAL3) is required when the impact of compromised systems could lead to personal harm, significant financial loss, harm the public interest or involve civil or criminal violations. AAL3 requires authentication that is "based on proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol." This type of authentication is used to achieve the strongest level of authentication assurance. This is typically done through hardware cryptographic modules. When developing web applications, this will commonly lead to WebAuthn or PassKeys.

### Session Management: client- vs server-side sessions

HTTP on its own is a session-less protocol: no data is shared between requests. When you look at how we are using the web, this is clearly not what is user-visible as for example you log into a website and stay logged in during subsequent requests. This is possible as session-management has been implemented on top of HTTP.
Once the initial successful user authentication has taken place, an application may choose to track and maintain this authentication state for a limited amount of time. This will allow the user to continue using the application without having to keep re-authentication with each request. Tracking of this user state is called Session Management.
Session-Management can be roughly categorized in client- and server-side session management. In the former, all session data is stored within the client and transmitted on each request to the server. The latter stores session-specific data on the server, e.g., in a database, and only transmits an identifier to the client. The client then submits only the session-identifier on each request and the server retrieves the session-data from the server-side storage.

From a security-perspective server-side sessions have multiple benefits:
- Data is not directly stored on the client: this can be problematic, e.g., when handling sensitive data. In addition, client-side session-management solutions must ensure that client-side data has not been tampered with.
- Less data is transmitted between client and server (which is not as relevant as network bandwidth has increased)
- Server-side session-management allows for session-invalidation, e.g., a user can logout all of their sessions
By default, always use server-side session management..

## Implementation

### When using Passwords

#### Password Requirements
Passwords should comply with the following requirements at the very least:
- be at least 8 characters in length if multi-factor authentication (MFA) and other controls are also used. If MFA is not possible, this should be increased to at least 10 characters
- all printing ASCII characters as well as the space character should be acceptable in memorized secrets
- encourage the use of long passwords and passphrases
- remove complexity requirements as these have been found to be of limited effectiveness. Instead, the adoption of MFA or longer password lengths is recommended
- ensure that passwords used are not commonly used passwords that have been already been leaked in a previous compromise. You may choose to block the top 1000 or 10000 most common passwords which meet the above length requirements and are found in compromised password lists. The following link contains the most commonly found passwords: <https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/tree/master/Passwords>
- Enforce password rotation, to avoid potential breaches due to the fact the same password is being used for a very long period of time

#### Implement Secure Password Recovery Mechanism

It is common for an application to have a mechanism for a user to gain access to their account in the event they forget their password. A good design workflow for a password recovery feature will use multi-factor authentication elements. For example, it may ask a security question - something they know, and then send a generated token to a device - something they own.
Please see the [Forgot_Password_Cheat_Sheet](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Forgot_Password_Cheat_Sheet) and [Choosing_and_Using_Security_Questions_Cheat_Sheet](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Choosing_and_Using_Security_Questions_Cheat_Sheet) for further details.

#### Implement Secure Password Storage

In order to provide strong authentication controls, an application must securely store user credentials. Furthermore, cryptographic controls should be in place such that if a credential (e.g., a password) is compromised, the attacker does not immediately have access to this information. Please see the [OWASP Password Storage Cheat Sheet](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Password_Storage_Cheat_Sheet) for further details.

### Server-Side Session-Management

Typically server-side session management is implemented with HTTP cookies which are used to store a session-identifier. When a new session is requested, the server generates a new session-identifier and transmits it to the client (browser). On each subsequent request, the session-identifier is transmitted from the client to the server, and the server uses this session-identifier to lookup session-data within a server-side database.

#### Session Generation and Expiration

User state is tracked in a session. This session is typically stored on the server for traditional web based session management. A session identifier is then given to the user so the user can identify which server-side session contains the correct user data. The client only needs to maintain this session identifier, which also keeps sensitive server-side session data off of the client.
Here are a few controls to consider when building or implementing session management solutions:
- Ensure that the session id is long, unique and random, i.e., is of high entropy.
- The application should generate a new session during authentication and re-authentication.
- The application should implement an idle timeout after a period of inactivity and an absolute maximum lifetime for each session, after which users must re-authenticate. The length of the timeouts should be inversely proportional with the value of the data protected.

Please see the [Session Management Cheat Sheet](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet) further details. ASVS Section 3 covers additional session management requirements.

### Client-Side Session-Management

Server-side sessions can be limiting for some forms of authentication. "Stateless services" allow for client side management of session data for performance purposes so the server has less of a burden to store user sessions.
These "stateless" applications typically generate a short-lived access token containing all of the current user’s access permissions which is then included in all subsequent requests. Cryptography must be employed so that the client cannot alter the permissions stored within the token. When a client requests a server operation, the client includes the retrieved access token and the server verifies that the token has not been tampered with and extracts the permissions from the token. These permissions are then used for subsequent permission checks.

#### JWT (JSON Web Tokens)

JSON Web Token (JWT) is an open standard ([RFC 7519](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519)) that defines a compact and self-contained way for securely transmitting information between parties as a JSON object. This information can be verified and trusted as long as it is digitally signed by a trusted authority. A JWT token is created during authentication and is verified by the server (or servers) before any processing. However, JWTs are often not saved by the server after initial creation. JWTs are typically created and then handed to a client without being saved by the server in any way. The integrity of the token is maintained through the use of digital signatures so a server can later verify that the JWT is still valid and was not tampered with since its creation.
This approach is both stateless and portable in the way that client and server technologies can be different yet still interact.
Please note, that if you are using JWTs you have to make sure that the returned JWT is actually using one of the signing algorithms that you are using. Otherwise, an attacker could try to create a JWT signed with the NULL algorithm, use a MAC-vs-Signature confusion attack, or provide a custom JWS key for signing. When you are issuing JWTs, make double-sure that you are using a secure private key for signing the JWTs: each output JWT gives an attacker all information needed to perform an offline cracking attack, so you should rotate keys frequently too.

### Browser Cookies

Browser cookies are a common method for web applications to store session identifiers for web applications implementing standard session management techniques. Here are some defenses to consider when using browser cookies.

- When browser cookies are used as the mechanism for tracking the session of an authenticated user, these should be accessible to a minimum set of domains and paths and should be tagged to expire at, or soon after, the session’s validity period.
  - Please be aware that not explicitly stating a domain during cookie setup will use the current origin as domain. This is a sensible default.
  - Please be aware, that while stating a path during cookie setup will limit the browser to only submit the cookie if the request lies within the stated path. This protects the cookie of one application from being accessed by another application within a different path on the same server. This protection is brittle: if the “other” application has an XSS vulnerability and the attacker can introduce iframes, the “path” protection can be circumvented.
- The ‘secure’ flag should be set to ensure the transfer is done via secure channel only (TLS).
- HttpOnly flag should be set to prevent the cookie from being accessed via JavaScript.
- Adding “[samesite](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SameSite)” attributes to cookies prevents [some modern browsers](https://caniuse.com/#search=samesite) from sending cookies with cross-site requests and provides protection against cross-site request forgery and information leakage attacks.

## Vulnerabilities Prevented

- [A07:2021 – Identification and Authentication Failures](https://owasp.org/Top10/A07_2021-Identification_and_Authentication_Failures/)
- [OWASP Mobile Top 10 2016-M4- Insecure Authentication](https://owasp.org/www-project-mobile-top-10/2016-risks/m4-insecure-authentication)

## References

- [OWASP Cheat Sheet: Authentication](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Authentication_Cheat_Sheet)
- [OWASP Cheat Sheet: Password Storage](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Password_Storage_Cheat_Sheet)
- [OWASP Cheat Sheet: Forgot Password](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Password_Storage_Cheat_Sheet)
- [OWASP Cheat Sheet: Choosing and Using Security Questions](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Choosing_and_Using_Security_Questions_Cheat_Sheet)
- [OWASP Cheat Sheet: Session Management](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet)
- [NIST Special Publication 800-63 Revision 3 - Digital Identity Guidelines](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html)

## Tools

- Daniel Miessler: [Most commonly found passwords](https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/tree/master/Passwords)
